\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename majutsu.info
@settitle Majutsu User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Majutsu: (majutsu).   Using Jujutsu from Emacs with Majutsu.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Majutsu User Manual
@subtitle for version 0.6.0
@author 0WD0
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Majutsu User Manual

Majutsu is a Magit-inspired Emacs interface for the Jujutsu (jj) version control system. It provides a powerful@comma{} interactive log viewer and a comprehensive set of commands for manipulating revision history with the efficiency and comfort Emacs users expect.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Getting Started::
* Interface Concepts::
* Inspecting::
* Manipulating::
* Bookmarks::
* Tags::
* Git Integration::
* Workspaces::
* Conflict Resolution::
* Customizing::
* Template DSL::
* Keystroke Index::
* Function and Command Index::
* Variable Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* About Majutsu::
* About Jujutsu::
* Acknowledgments::

Installation

* Requirements::
* Installing from Git::
* Post-Installation Tasks::

Installing from Git

* Doom Emacs::
* use-package with straight.el: use-package with straightel. 
* use-package with package-vc::
* Manual Installation::

Interface Concepts

* Buffers and Modes::
* Sections::
* Transient Menus::
* Visual Selection System::
* Completion and Confirmation::
* Running JJ::

Buffers and Modes

* Log Buffer::
* Diff Buffer::
* Blob Buffer::
* Process Buffer::
* JJ description Buffer::

Inspecting

* Log Buffer: Log Buffer (1). 
* Diffing::
* File and Blob Inspection::
* Annotate (Blame)::
* Ediff and Diffedit::
* Process Buffer: Process Buffer (1). 
* Operation Log (Experimental)::

Log Buffer

* Log Display::
* Log Options Transient::
* Revset Builder::
* Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)::
* @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} Schema::
* Configuration Examples::
* Migration Notes::
* Copying From Log Buffers::

Diffing

* Diff Transient::
* Diff Buffer: Diff Buffer (1). 

Manipulating

* Creating Changes::
* Describing Changes::
* Committing::
* Editing Changes::
* Squashing::
* Absorbing::
* Rebasing::
* Duplicating::
* Abandoning::
* Undo and Redo::
* Splitting::
* Restoring::
* Reverting::
* Sparse Working Copy::
* Interactive Patching::
* Metaediting::
* Simplifying Parents::

Interactive Patching

* How It Works::
* Diff Context Inheritance::
* Visual Feedback::
* Selection Semantics::
* Technical Implementation::
* Edge Cases::
* Workflow Example::
* Customization::

Bookmarks

* Understanding Bookmarks::
* Bookmark Transient::

Tags

* Understanding Tags::
* Tag Transient::

Git Integration

* Git Transient::
* Pushing::
* Fetching::
* Remotes::
* Clone and Init::
* Export and Import::

Workspaces

* Understanding Workspaces::
* Workspace Transient::

Conflict Resolution

* Detecting Conflicts::
* Entering Conflict Mode::
* majutsu-conflict-mode Commands::

Customizing

* Essential Settings::
* Confirmation Settings::
* Process Options::
* Display Options::
* Diff Options::
* Buffer Hooks::
* Description Options::
* Evil Integration::

Template DSL

* Overview::
* Why Use the DSL@?::
* Basic Syntax::
* Method Calls and Self::
* Operators::
* Conditionals and Composition::
* Elisp Embedding::
* Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations::
* Extending the DSL::
* Type System and Upstream Alignment::
* Supported Commands (for development reference)::

Basic Syntax

* Vectors and Concatenation::
* String Literals::
* Raw Injection::
* Booleans and Numbers::

Method Calls and Self

* Explicit Method Chaining::
* Implicit Self Context::
* Explicit Receiver References::
* Binding Self in Helper Bodies::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@menu
* About Majutsu::
* About Jujutsu::
* Acknowledgments::
@end menu

@node About Majutsu
@section About Majutsu

Majutsu aims to bring the legendary workflow of Magit to the Jujutsu (jj) version control system. It is not merely a wrapper around the @samp{jj} CLI@comma{} but a deeply integrated Emacs environment that leverages Magit's section management and transient menu systems. Majutsu provides visual tools for complex operations like rebasing@comma{} squashing@comma{} and conflict resolution@comma{} making the power of Jujutsu accessible and intuitive.

Originally started as a fork of @samp{jj-mode.el}@comma{} Majutsu has been heavily refactored and expanded to include a new template DSL@comma{} asynchronous process handling@comma{} and a native Evil-mode integration.

@node About Jujutsu
@section About Jujutsu

Jujutsu (jj) is a next-generation version control system that is both simple and powerful. It features a unique "working copy is a commit" model (@@)@comma{} first-class support for mutable history@comma{} and robust conflict management. Unlike Git@comma{} jj does not have a staging area; instead@comma{} changes in the working copy are automatically recorded into the current revision. This makes it an ideal companion for Emacs@comma{} where buffers are often in a state of flux.

@node Acknowledgments
@section Acknowledgments

Majutsu stands on the shoulders of giants. We are grateful to:
@itemize
@item
The Jujutsu community for creating a revolutionary VCS@.
@item
The Magit authors and contributors for defining the gold standard of VCS interfaces.
@item
Brandon Olivier for the initial codebase of @samp{jj-mode.el}.
@end itemize

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Requirements::
* Installing from Git::
* Post-Installation Tasks::
@end menu

@node Requirements
@section Requirements

@itemize
@item
Emacs 29.1 or later.
@item
Jujutsu (jj) v0.39.0 or later installed and in your @samp{PATH}.
@item
@samp{magit} 3.3.0 or later (for section management).
@item
@samp{transient} 0.5.0 or later (popup menus).
@item
@samp{with-editor} (for descriptive message editing).
@end itemize

@node Installing from Git
@section Installing from Git

Majutsu is currently available via GitHub. You can install it using your preferred Emacs package manager.

@menu
* Doom Emacs::
* use-package with straight.el: use-package with straightel. 
* use-package with package-vc::
* Manual Installation::
@end menu

@node Doom Emacs
@subsection Doom Emacs

Add the following to your @samp{packages.el}:
@lisp
(package! majutsu :recipe (:host github :repo "0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node use-package with straightel
@subsection use-package with straight.el

@lisp
(use-package majutsu
  :straight (:host github :repo "0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node use-package with package-vc
@subsection use-package with package-vc

Emacs 29+ users can use the built-in @samp{package-vc} support:
@lisp
(use-package majutsu
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/0WD0/majutsu"))
@end lisp

@node Manual Installation
@subsection Manual Installation

Clone the repository and add it to your @samp{load-path}:
@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/majutsu")
(require 'majutsu)
@end lisp

@node Post-Installation Tasks
@section Post-Installation Tasks

If you use Evil mode@comma{} Majutsu includes a native integration that provides sensible Vim-like keybindings. It is enabled by default if Evil is detected. You can customize this via @samp{M-x customize-group RET majutsu-evil RET}.

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

To begin using Majutsu@comma{} navigate to a directory within a Jujutsu repository and run @code{M-x majutsu-log} (or its alias @code{majutsu}).

If the directory is not a repository@comma{} Majutsu will offer to initialize one using @samp{jj git init}. Once the log buffer opens@comma{} you will see a graphical representation of your revision history@comma{} similar to Magit's log but with Jujutsu's unique features like hidden and divergent revisions clearly marked.

Navigation is straightforward: use @code{n} and @code{p} to move between revisions@comma{} and @code{RET} to visit the revision at point. Press @code{?} at any time to open the Dispatcher@comma{} which shows all available commands.

@node Interface Concepts
@chapter Interface Concepts

@menu
* Buffers and Modes::
* Sections::
* Transient Menus::
* Visual Selection System::
* Completion and Confirmation::
* Running JJ::
@end menu

@node Buffers and Modes
@section Buffers and Modes

Majutsu uses several specialized buffer types to provide a rich interface.

@menu
* Log Buffer::
* Diff Buffer::
* Blob Buffer::
* Process Buffer::
* JJ description Buffer::
@end menu

@node Log Buffer
@subsection Log Buffer

The primary interface for Majutsu. It displays the revision graph@comma{} working copy status@comma{} and active workspaces. It uses @samp{majutsu-log-mode}@comma{} derived from @samp{magit-section-mode}.

@node Diff Buffer
@subsection Diff Buffer

Displays changes between revisions or within the working copy. It supports Magit-style hunk and file sections@comma{} word-level refinement@comma{} and interactive patching.

@node Blob Buffer
@subsection Blob Buffer

Allows viewing the contents of a file at a specific revision. You can navigate through the file's history using @code{n} and @code{p} within the blob buffer.

@node Process Buffer
@subsection Process Buffer

Shows the output of background @samp{jj} commands. If a command fails@comma{} you can press @code{$} to inspect the error.

@node JJ description Buffer
@subsection JJ description Buffer

JJ descriptions are edited in an edit session. In the background@comma{} @samp{jj}
waits for the editor@comma{} usually @samp{emacsclient} via @samp{with-editor}@comma{} to save the
description file and return. If the editor exits with a non-zero status@comma{}
then @samp{jj} aborts the operation. The most important commands are therefore
those for finishing or canceling the edit session.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-c C-c} (@code{with-editor-finish})
@kindex C-c C-c
@findex with-editor-finish
Finish the current edit session successfully. @samp{jj} then uses the
description found in the file.

@item @kbd{C-c C-k} (@code{with-editor-cancel})
@kindex C-c C-k
@findex with-editor-cancel
Cancel the current edit session. @samp{jj} aborts the operation@comma{} but leaves the
edited file untouched.
@end table

JJ-generated comment blocks are highlighted using commit-message faces.
Lines beginning with @code{JJ:} are treated as comments@comma{} and @code{JJ: ignore-rest}
marks the remainder of the buffer as comment. You can customize
@code{majutsu-jjdescription-major-mode}@comma{} @code{majutsu-jjdescription-comment-prefix}@comma{}
@code{majutsu-jjdescription-change-id-face}@comma{} and
@code{global-majutsu-jjdescription-mode}. Jujutsu currently does not support
changing the comment prefix; the option exists for future compatibility.

Descriptions are also stored in a ring that lives for the duration of the
Emacs session. Majutsu saves the current description when an edit session
starts@comma{} and again when it finishes or is canceled@comma{} so older descriptions can
be recovered easily.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-c M-s} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-save-message})
@kindex C-c M-s
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-save-message
Save the current buffer contents to the description ring.

@item @kbd{M-p} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-prev-message})
@kindex M-p
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-prev-message
Cycle backward through the description ring@comma{} after saving the current
description to the ring. With a numeric prefix ARG@comma{} go back ARG entries.

@item @kbd{M-n} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-next-message})
@kindex M-n
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-next-message
Cycle forward through the description ring@comma{} after saving the current
description to the ring. With a numeric prefix ARG@comma{} go forward ARG entries.

@item @kbd{C-c M-p} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-backward})
@kindex C-c M-p
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-backward
Search backward through the description ring for a substring match.

@item @kbd{C-c M-n} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-forward})
@kindex C-c M-n
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-search-message-forward
Search forward through the description ring for a substring match.

@item @kbd{C-c C-d} (@code{majutsu-jjdescription-show-diff})
@kindex C-c C-d
@findex majutsu-jjdescription-show-diff
Show the diff for the described change. If the buffer contains a
@code{JJ: Change ID:} line@comma{} then use that revision; otherwise fall back to @code{@@}.
@end table

@node Sections
@section Sections

Majutsu organizes information into collapsible sections. You can use @code{TAB} to toggle the visibility of a section (e.g.@comma{} a revision's description in the log@comma{} or a file in a diff).

@node Transient Menus
@section Transient Menus

Commands in Majutsu are grouped into "transient" menus. These popups allow you to select options and flags before executing a command. For example@comma{} pressing @code{r} opens the Rebase transient.

@node Visual Selection System
@section Visual Selection System

For commands like Rebase@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Absorb@comma{} Majutsu uses a visual selection system. You can mark "source" and "destination" revisions directly in the log buffer@comma{} and they will be highlighted with distinct colors until the operation is executed or cleared.

@node Completion and Confirmation
@section Completion and Confirmation

Majutsu integrates with Emacs' completion system (like Vertico or Ivy) for selecting bookmarks@comma{} remotes@comma{} and revsets. Revset completion candidates are annotated with source labels (pseudo/workspace/bookmark/tag) to make ambiguous names easier to identify. Destructive operations like @code{abandon} or @code{undo} will prompt for confirmation.

@node Running JJ
@section Running JJ

Majutsu runs @samp{jj} commands asynchronously whenever possible to keep the Emacs UI responsive. Large log graphs or remote operations won't freeze your editor.

@node Inspecting
@chapter Inspecting

@menu
* Log Buffer: Log Buffer (1). 
* Diffing::
* File and Blob Inspection::
* Annotate (Blame)::
* Ediff and Diffedit::
* Process Buffer: Process Buffer (1). 
* Operation Log (Experimental)::
@end menu

@node Log Buffer (1)
@section Log Buffer

The log buffer is the heart of Majutsu. It displays the history graph using a custom template DSL that mirrors the @samp{jj log} output but adds interactivity.

@menu
* Log Display::
* Log Options Transient::
* Revset Builder::
* Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)::
* @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} Schema::
* Configuration Examples::
* Migration Notes::
* Copying From Log Buffers::
@end menu

@node Log Display
@subsection Log Display

Each revision in the log is a section. The visible anchor line is built from fields assigned to the @code{heading} module plus any auxiliary fields assigned to the @code{tail} module in @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} (for example@comma{} author and timestamp). Graph prefixes and graph-related indentation are rendered as display-only prefix decoration rather than real buffer text@comma{} so they do not get copied accidentally and point does not land on them as editable text. Collapsed by default@comma{} you can expand a revision to see foldable @code{body} module content (for example@comma{} long descriptions).

@node Log Options Transient
@subsection Log Options Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-log-transient})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-log-transient
Open the log options transient.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{r}
@kindex r
Set a revset filter (e.g.@comma{} @samp{all()} or @samp{mine()}).
@item @kbd{-n}
@kindex -n
Limit the number of revisions shown.
@item @kbd{-v}
@kindex -v
Toggle reverse order.
@item @kbd{-G}
@kindex -G
Toggle the ASCII graph.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Add fileset/path filters to limit the log to matching files.
@end table

@node Revset Builder
@subsection Revset Builder

While you can type revsets manually@comma{} Majutsu's selection system allows you to build them interactively. Commands that require a revset will often default to the revision at point or your current selection.

@node Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)
@subsection Log Output Protocol (Sequential Markers)

Majutsu's log parser uses an ordered marker protocol embedded in jj template output:

@itemize
@item
Entry start: @samp{\x1dS}
@item
Tail start: @samp{\x1dT}
@item
Body start: @samp{\x1dB}
@item
Metadata start: @samp{\x1dM}
@item
Entry end: @samp{\x1dE}
@end itemize

Within each module payload@comma{} fields are separated by @samp{\x1e}.

Protocol control bytes are reserved:

@itemize
@item
@samp{\x1d} for module markers
@item
@samp{\x1e} for field boundaries
@item
@samp{\x1f} for encoded logical newlines
@end itemize

Avoid emitting these bytes literally in user templates unless intentionally participating in the protocol.

Newline rules:

@itemize
@item
@strong{heading module}: may contain real physical newlines.
@item
@strong{tail/body/metadata modules}: stay in the trailing payload; encode logical newlines as @samp{\x1f} and decode them in postprocessing.
@end itemize

Parsing is strictly sequential and positional (not key/value based):

@enumerate
@item
Detect @samp{\x1dS} and lock the entry indent column.
@item
Collect heading lines until @samp{\x1dT} is found.
@item
Parse @samp{T -> B -> M -> E} payload segments in order on the final heading line (no extra physical line breaks between these module markers).
@item
Keep lines between current entry @samp{E} and next entry @samp{S} attached to the current section heading area (graph continuation lines).
@end enumerate

@node @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} Schema
@subsection @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} Schema

Each item in @code{majutsu-log-commit-columns} is a plist:

@table @asis
@item @code{:field}
Field symbol mapped to a @code{majutsu-log-template-<field>} variable.
@item @code{:module}
One of @code{heading}@comma{} @code{tail}@comma{} @code{body}@comma{} @code{metadata}.
@item @code{:face}
Highlight policy for that field.
@item @code{:post}
Optional postprocessor function (or function list).
@end table

Only these keys are used by the current parser/renderer.
Majutsu ensures hidden metadata fields @code{id}@comma{} @code{commit-id}@comma{} and @code{parent-ids} are always available even if omitted from user configuration.

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Module Semantics}Module Semantics


@table @asis
@item @code{heading}
Visible anchor-line content on the left (can span physical lines before the tail segment begins).
@item @code{tail}
Single-line auxiliary content rendered on the anchor line with right alignment. It remains searchable as real text@comma{} but copying a mixed heading+tail region drops the tail text by default; copying the tail alone preserves it.
@item
Rendered log spans are tagged with @code{majutsu-log-module}@comma{} @code{majutsu-log-field}@comma{} @code{majutsu-log-column}@comma{} @code{majutsu-log-entry-id}@comma{} and @code{majutsu-log-decoration} so explicit copy commands can distinguish content from graph/tail decorations.
@item
Hidden transport fields always include @code{id}@comma{} @code{commit-id}@comma{} and @code{parent-ids}@comma{} even if you omit them from visible layout. That keeps stable identity@comma{} relation navigation@comma{} and commit-hash copying available.
@item @code{body}
Foldable section body.
@item @code{metadata}
Parsed/stored for behavior and lookup; not directly shown by default.
@end table

@item
@anchor{Face Policy (@code{face})}Face Policy (@code{:face})


@table @asis
@item @code{t}
Preserve jj-provided text properties/highlighting.
@item @code{nil}
Strip text properties (plain string).
@item @code{FACE-SYMBOL}
Repaint field using that face.
@end table

If @code{:face} is omitted@comma{} Majutsu preserves jj-provided text properties (@code{t}).

@item
@anchor{Postprocessing (@code{post})}Postprocessing (@code{:post})


@code{:post} can be:

@itemize
@item
A function symbol
@item
A list of functions (applied left-to-right)
@item
Omitted or @code{:default} (uses default postprocessors)
@item
@code{nil} (disable column postprocessors)
@end itemize

Function contract:

@lisp
(fn VALUE &optional CTX) => NEW-VALUE
@end lisp

@code{CTX} includes at least @code{:field}@comma{} @code{:module}@comma{} and the normalized @code{:column}
spec.

Postprocessors run per column instance@comma{} so the same field can appear in
multiple modules and project to different values. Transport decoding (for
example@comma{} turning @samp{\x1f} back into @samp{\n}) happens before @code{:post} runs.

When you provide a function or function list in @code{:post}@comma{} Majutsu appends it
after the field's default postprocessors.
@end enumerate

@node Configuration Examples
@subsection Configuration Examples

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Minimal layout}Minimal layout


@lisp
(setq majutsu-log-commit-columns
      '((:field change-id   :module heading  :face t)
        (:field description :module heading  :face t)
        (:field author      :module tail     :face magit-log-author)
        (:field timestamp   :module tail     :face magit-log-date)
        (:field long-desc   :module body     :face t)
        (:field id          :module metadata :face nil)
        (:field commit-id   :module metadata :face nil)
        (:field flags       :module metadata :face nil)))
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Keep heading multiline + encoded body multiline}Keep heading multiline + encoded body multiline


@lisp
;; heading field can emit real newlines directly
(setq majutsu-log-template-description
      [:concat [:change_id] "\n" [:description]])

;; non-heading field should encode line breaks as \x1f
(setq majutsu-log-template-long-desc
      [:description :lines :skip 1 :join "\x1f"])
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Custom postprocessor}Custom postprocessor


@lisp
(defun my-log-trim (value &optional _ctx)
  (if (stringp value) (string-trim-right value) value))

(setq majutsu-log-commit-columns
      '((:field description :module heading :face t :post my-log-trim)
        (:field id :module metadata :face nil)))
@end lisp
@end enumerate

@node Migration Notes
@subsection Migration Notes

Older column keys like @code{:align} and @code{:visible} are no longer part of the log column schema.
The historical @code{right-margin} placement has been replaced by the @code{tail} module@comma{} which renders real text on the anchor line with right alignment.
Move fields between visual areas by changing @code{:module}@comma{} and adjust display behavior with @code{:face} and @code{:post}. In log buffers@comma{} copying a mixed heading+tail selection strips the tail text by default@comma{} while copying the tail itself preserves it. Graph prefixes and graph-related indentation are display-only@comma{} so ordinary copy operations only capture semantic content rather than the visible graph gutter.

@node Copying From Log Buffers
@subsection Copying From Log Buffers

Majutsu now provides both default copy filtering and explicit semantic copy commands. These commands are available through the dispatcher copy submenu and via @code{M-x}.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? w s} (@code{majutsu-copy-section-value})
@kindex ? w s
@findex majutsu-copy-section-value
Copy the current section's stable value (for @code{jj-commit}@comma{} this is the revision id at point). If the region is active@comma{} it falls back to ordinary region copy.
@item @kbd{? w f} (@code{majutsu-log-copy-field})
@kindex ? w f
@findex majutsu-log-copy-field
Copy the rendered field value at point.
@item @kbd{? w F} (@code{majutsu-log-copy-entry-field})
@kindex ? w F
@findex majutsu-log-copy-entry-field
Choose any canonical field stored on the current entry@comma{} including hidden metadata that is not visible in the current layout.
@item @kbd{? w h} (@code{majutsu-log-copy-commit-id})
@kindex ? w h
@findex majutsu-log-copy-commit-id
Copy the current entry's commit hash from hidden metadata.
@item @kbd{? w m} (@code{majutsu-log-copy-module})
@kindex ? w m
@findex majutsu-log-copy-module
Copy the rendered visible module at point (@code{heading}@comma{} @code{tail}@comma{} or @code{body})@comma{} without graph-prefix or tail-spacer decoration.
@end table

This keeps ordinary Emacs copying predictable while still offering precise log-aware copy operations when you want semantic rather than purely visual text.

@node Diffing
@section Diffing

@menu
* Diff Transient::
* Diff Buffer: Diff Buffer (1). 
@end menu

@node Diff Transient
@subsection Diff Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-diff})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-diff
Open the Diff transient.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{r}
@kindex r
Select revisions to diff (@samp{--revisions}). Can specify multiple revisions or a revset like @samp{B::D}.
@item @kbd{f / t}
@kindex f / t
Select the @samp{--from} and @samp{--to} revisions.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit diff to selected files/filesets.
@item @kbd{-g}
@kindex -g
Toggle Git-style diff output.
@item @kbd{-W}
@kindex -W
Toggle color-words diff output.
@item @kbd{-S}
@kindex -S
Toggle stat output.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Toggle summary output.
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Set context line count.
@item @kbd{-b / -w}
@kindex -b / -w
Ignore whitespace amount / ignore all whitespace.
@end table

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Understanding @samp{--revisions}}Understanding @samp{--revisions}


The @samp{--revisions} argument accepts any revset that forms a @emph{contiguous} set of commits. "Contiguous" means no gaps in the DAG@comma{} but @strong{forks and merges are allowed}.

Examples:
@table @asis
@item @samp{-r @@}
Changes in the working copy commit (default).
@item @samp{-r @@-}
Changes in the parent of the working copy.
@item @samp{-r B::D}
Total changes from B through D@.
@item @samp{-r 'A | B'}
Valid only if A and B form a contiguous set; gaps produce an error.
@end table

When visiting a file from such a diff:
@itemize
@item
On an @strong{added} or @strong{context} line: visits @samp{heads(revisions)}.
@item
On a @strong{removed} line: visits @samp{roots(revisions)-} (the parents of roots).
@end itemize

@strong{Note}: When the revset has multiple heads or roots@comma{} the target revision for file visits may be ambiguous. For example@comma{} in an X-shaped history:
@example
D   E       <- two heads
 \ /
  C
 / \
A   B       <- two roots
@end example
If you diff @samp{-r A::D | B::E}@comma{} there are two heads (D@comma{} E) and two roots (A@comma{} B). The diff shows changes from the @emph{merged} parents to the @emph{merged} heads. If D and E modify the same lines@comma{} the diff will show conflict markers. When visiting files@comma{} Majutsu picks one of the heads/roots@comma{} which may not be the specific commit where the displayed change originated. For precise navigation@comma{} use @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} with single revisions instead.
@end enumerate

@node Diff Buffer (1)
@subsection Diff Buffer

The diff buffer is highly interactive:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{@key{RET}} (@code{majutsu-diff-visit-file})
@kindex RET
@findex majutsu-diff-visit-file
Visit the appropriate version of the file at point. For working copy diffs@comma{} added/context lines visit the workspace file while removed lines visit the parent-side blob. For committed changes@comma{} it visits the blob at the corresponding side.
@item @kbd{C-j / C-<return>} (@code{majutsu-diff-visit-workspace-file})
@kindex C-j / C-<return>
@findex majutsu-diff-visit-workspace-file
Visit the workspace file@comma{} regardless of diff type. Note: when Evil mode is active@comma{} @code{C-j} may be overridden by Evil's section navigation; use @code{C-<return>} instead@comma{} which is unaffected.
@item @kbd{-} (@code{majutsu-diff-less-context})
@kindex -
@findex majutsu-diff-less-context
Decrease the context for diff hunks by COUNT lines.
@item @kbd{+} (@code{majutsu-diff-more-context})
@kindex +
@findex majutsu-diff-more-context
Increase the context for diff hunks by COUNT lines.
@item @kbd{0} (@code{majutsu-diff-default-context})
@kindex 0
@findex majutsu-diff-default-context
Reset the context for diff hunks to the default height.
@item @kbd{t} (@code{majutsu-diff-toggle-refine-hunk})
@kindex t
@findex majutsu-diff-toggle-refine-hunk
Toggle word-level refinement.
@end table

When Evil mode is active@comma{} Majutsu follows evil-collection's
conventions for Magit diff buffers: @code{+} still increases context@comma{} @code{=}
decreases it@comma{} and @samp{~} resets it to the default.

When @samp{--color-words} is enabled@comma{} Majutsu renders the old/new line numbers in
the left margin and uses "@dots{}" lines to split hunks.
With refinement enabled@comma{} color-words hunks also show a shadow cursor on the
paired side (controlled by @samp{smerge-refine-shadow-cursor}).
Navigation (@samp{RET} / @samp{C-j}) still respects the side at point by using stored
line/column metadata from the color-words backend.

@node File and Blob Inspection
@section File and Blob Inspection

Majutsu's file inspector is implemented by @samp{majutsu-file} and can be used both
from command prompts and with defaults derived from the current section context.

Commands:
@deffn Command majutsu-find-file
Prompt for revset + path (defaulting from point when possible) and open that file as a blob.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-find-file-other-window
Like @code{majutsu-find-file}@comma{} but display the blob in another window.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-find-file-other-frame
Like @code{majutsu-find-file}@comma{} but display the blob in another frame.
@end deffn

Blob buffers are read-only snapshots with history-aware navigation:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{p / n} (@code{majutsu-blob-previous / majutsu-blob-next})
@kindex p / n
@findex majutsu-blob-previous / majutsu-blob-next
Jump to the previous or next revision that touched this file@comma{} while preserving cursor position as much as possible.
@item @kbd{V} (@code{majutsu-blob-visit-file})
@kindex V
@findex majutsu-blob-visit-file
Jump to the workspace version of the same file.
@item @kbd{C-c m} (@code{majutsu-blob-visit-magit})
@kindex C-c m
@findex majutsu-blob-visit-magit
Open the current blob in Magit's blob viewer.
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-annotate-addition})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-annotate-addition
Start annotate for the current blob.
@item @kbd{g}
@kindex g
Revert or reload the current blob content.
@item @kbd{e / C-x C-q} (@code{majutsu-blob-edit-start})
@kindex e / C-x C-q
@findex majutsu-blob-edit-start
Enter editable blob mode (wdired-style).
@itemize
@item
Blob navigation keys are disabled while editing@comma{} so blob-mode bindings do not interfere with text edits.
@item Key: C-c C-c (majutsu-blob-edit-finish)
Apply changes through non-interactive @samp{jj diffedit} and exit edit mode. Majutsu copies current buffer text into the diffedit right side and finishes automatically@comma{} without opening the right-side temp file buffer.
@item Key: C-x C-q (majutsu-blob-edit-exit)
Leave editable mode. If modified@comma{} it prompts to save or abort; if unchanged@comma{} it exits immediately.
@item Key: C-c C-k (majutsu-blob-edit-abort)
Abort blob edits@comma{} restore the original content@comma{} and restore the original cursor position.
@item
In Evil:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{i}
@kindex i
In blob mode@comma{} enter editable blob mode and stay in normal state.
@item @kbd{i}
@kindex i
In editable mode@comma{} enter insert state.
@end table
@item
Editable mode also changes cursor visuals (see @code{majutsu-blob-edit-cursor-type}); with Evil@comma{} normal-state cursor is updated too.
@end itemize
@end table

@node Annotate (Blame)
@section Annotate (Blame)

Majutsu annotate is implemented by @samp{majutsu-annotate} and uses
@samp{jj file annotate} under the hood.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-annotate-addition})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-annotate-addition
Enter annotate from a blob or file buffer. When pressed again on an annotated chunk@comma{} jump to its parent revision (when available) and re-annotate there.
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-annotate-cycle-style})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-annotate-cycle-style
Cycle heading/highlight/line styles (see @samp{majutsu-annotate-styles}).
@item @kbd{n / p} (@code{majutsu-annotate-next-chunk / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk})
@kindex n / p
@findex majutsu-annotate-next-chunk / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk
Move to the next or previous chunk.
@item @kbd{N / P} (@code{majutsu-annotate-next-chunk-same-commit / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk-same-commit})
@kindex N / P
@findex majutsu-annotate-next-chunk-same-commit / majutsu-annotate-previous-chunk-same-commit
Move to the next or previous chunk from the same commit.
@item @kbd{@key{RET}} (@code{majutsu-annotate-show-commit})
@kindex RET
@findex majutsu-annotate-show-commit
Show the chunk's revision diff.
@item @kbd{M-w} (@code{majutsu-annotate-copy-hash})
@kindex M-w
@findex majutsu-annotate-copy-hash
Copy the chunk change-id.
@item @kbd{@key{SPC} / S-@key{SPC}} (@code{majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-up / majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-down})
@kindex SPC / S-SPC
@findex majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-up / majutsu-annotate-show-or-scroll-down
Scroll the diff window if it is already open.
@end table

@node Ediff and Diffedit
@section Ediff and Diffedit

@table @asis
@item @kbd{E} (@code{majutsu-ediff})
@kindex E
@findex majutsu-ediff
Open the Ediff transient.
@end table

Selection: choose revisions via @samp{--revisions} or @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} (with
point-toggle variants). In diff buffers@comma{} current range is used as default.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-ediff-dwim})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-ediff-dwim
Compare based on context (hunk@comma{} file@comma{} commit@comma{} or whole buffer).
@item @kbd{E} (@code{majutsu-ediff-edit})
@kindex E
@findex majutsu-ediff-edit
Run @samp{jj diffedit} with Emacs as @samp{ui.diff-editor}. If no file is at point@comma{} Majutsu prompts for a changed file@comma{} then launches a two-sided Ediff session for that single file (left/right temp files). Edit the right-side temp file and quit Ediff to return control to @samp{jj diffedit}. When @samp{majutsu-edit-finish-on-save} is non-nil@comma{} saving a diffedit temp file can finish the with-editor session automatically.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve
Resolve conflicted files. In a @samp{jj-commit} section@comma{} it lists conflicted files for that revision; otherwise it uses working copy @samp{@@}. Uses @samp{jj resolve} with 3-way Ediff (merge tool: @samp{$left}@comma{} @samp{$base}@comma{} @samp{$right}) for up-to-2-sided conflicts@comma{} and falls back to @samp{jj diffedit} for conflicts with more than 2 sides. In this flow@comma{} quitting Ediff without editing leaves jj's output unchanged@comma{} so the conflict stays unresolved. If you edited and quit@comma{} Majutsu asks whether to save the resolved result; choosing no discards edits and keeps conflicts. When only part of a conflict is resolved@comma{} remaining regions are written with git-style conflict markers so jj keeps unresolved regions unresolved.
@item @kbd{M} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict})
@kindex M
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Open the resolve target buffer (working-copy file or revision blob)@comma{} enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}@comma{} and jump to the first conflict.
@end table

Resolve entry points are available both from the Ediff transient and as direct commands:
@deffn Command majutsu-ediff-resolve
Resolve conflicted files using the default Ediff-based flow.
@end deffn

@deffn Command majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Open the conflict target directly and enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}.
@end deffn

@node Process Buffer (1)
@section Process Buffer

@table @asis
@item @kbd{$ (Emacs) / ` (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-process-buffer})
@kindex $ (Emacs) / ` (Evil)
@findex majutsu-process-buffer
Show the output of the last @samp{jj} command. This is essential for debugging failed operations or viewing long-running output such as remote fetches.
@end table

@node Operation Log (Experimental)
@section Operation Log (Experimental)

@deffn Command majutsu-op-log
View Jujutsu's operation history. You can see when commands were run and by whom.
@end deffn

@node Manipulating
@chapter Manipulating

@menu
* Creating Changes::
* Describing Changes::
* Committing::
* Editing Changes::
* Squashing::
* Absorbing::
* Rebasing::
* Duplicating::
* Abandoning::
* Undo and Redo::
* Splitting::
* Restoring::
* Reverting::
* Sparse Working Copy::
* Interactive Patching::
* Metaediting::
* Simplifying Parents::
@end menu

@node Creating Changes
@section Creating Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{O} (@code{majutsu-new-dwim})
@kindex O
@findex majutsu-new-dwim
Create a new change on top of the revision at point (DWIM).
@item @kbd{o} (@code{majutsu-new})
@kindex o
@findex majutsu-new
Open the New transient to specify options.
@item @kbd{A} (@code{majutsu-new-with-after})
@kindex A
@findex majutsu-new-with-after
Create a new change after the revision at point.
@item @kbd{B (Emacs) / I (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-new-with-before})
@kindex B (Emacs) / I (Evil)
@findex majutsu-new-with-before
Create a new change before the revision at point.
@end table

Useful transient entries include:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Parent revisions.
@item @kbd{-A}
@kindex -A
Insert after constraint.
@item @kbd{-B}
@kindex -B
Insert before constraint.
@item @kbd{-m}
@kindex -m
Set a message.
@item @kbd{-e}
@kindex -e
No edit (don't switch to the new change).
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj new -r REV}

@node Describing Changes
@section Describing Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-describe})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-describe
Edit the description of the revision at point. Supports @samp{--ignore-immutable} for immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj describe -r REV}

@node Committing
@section Committing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C} (@code{majutsu-commit})
@kindex C
@findex majutsu-commit
In Jujutsu@comma{} "commit" usually means finishing the current work. This command opens a description buffer for the working copy.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj commit}

@node Editing Changes
@section Editing Changes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-edit-changeset})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-edit-changeset
Move the working copy (@@) to the revision at point. Supports @samp{--ignore-immutable} for immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj edit REV}

@node Squashing
@section Squashing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-squash})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-squash
Open the Squash transient. You can select multiple source revisions (@samp{--from}) to squash into a destination (@samp{--into}).
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Revision to squash.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Source revisions (@samp{--from}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Destination revision (@samp{--into}).
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Onto destination.
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit squash to specific filesets.
@item @kbd{-k}
@kindex -k
Keep commits that become empty after squashing.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj squash --from SRC --into DEST [FILESETS...]}

@node Absorbing
@section Absorbing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{a (Emacs/Evil) / ? A} (@code{majutsu-absorb})
@kindex a (Emacs/Evil) / ? A
@findex majutsu-absorb
Open the Absorb transient.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Source revision (@samp{--from}@comma{} default @samp{@@}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Destination revset filter (@samp{--into}@comma{} default @samp{mutable()}).
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit absorb to specific filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj absorb --from REV --into REVSET [FILESETS...]}

@node Rebasing
@section Rebasing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-rebase})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-rebase
Open the Rebase transient. This is one of Majutsu's most powerful features@comma{} allowing you to visually select sources and destinations.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Rebase a specific revision.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Rebase an entire branch.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Specify the destination (@samp{--onto}).
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj rebase -s SRC -o DEST}

@node Duplicating
@section Duplicating

@table @asis
@item @kbd{y} (@code{majutsu-duplicate})
@kindex y
@findex majutsu-duplicate
Open the Duplicate transient. Allows selecting source revisions and destination.
@item @kbd{Y} (@code{majutsu-duplicate-dwim})
@kindex Y
@findex majutsu-duplicate-dwim
Duplicate the revision at point onto its current parent.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Source revisions to duplicate.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Destination (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj duplicate -r REV}

@node Abandoning
@section Abandoning

@table @asis
@item @kbd{k (Emacs) / x (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-abandon})
@kindex k (Emacs) / x (Evil)
@findex majutsu-abandon
Abandon the revision at point. Its changes are lost@comma{} and its descendants are rebased. With an active region selection@comma{} Majutsu abandons all selected revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj abandon -r REV}

@node Undo and Redo
@section Undo and Redo

@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-/ / C-? (Emacs)} (@code{majutsu-undo / majutsu-redo})
@kindex C-/ / C-? (Emacs)
@findex majutsu-undo / majutsu-redo
Undo or redo.
@item @kbd{u / C-r} (@code{Evil})
@kindex u / C-r
@findex Evil
Undo or redo.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj undo} or @samp{jj redo}

@node Splitting
@section Splitting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{S} (@code{majutsu-split})
@kindex S
@findex majutsu-split
Open the Split transient. This allows you to split a revision into multiple parts.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Specify the revision to split.
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Specify the destination (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert after or before constraints.
@item @kbd{-m}
@kindex -m
Set a message for the first part.
@item @kbd{-p}
@kindex -p
Parallel split mode.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit split to selected files or filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj split -r REV [FILESETS...]}

@node Restoring
@section Restoring

@table @asis
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-restore})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-restore
Open the Restore transient for undoing changes.
@item @kbd{-f}
@kindex -f
Restore from a specific revision (@samp{--from}).
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Restore to a specific revision (@samp{--to}).
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Undo changes introduced by a revision (@samp{--changes-in}).
@item @kbd{-d}
@kindex -d
Restore descendants as well.
@item @kbd{--}
@kindex --
Limit restore to selected files or filesets.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj restore --from REV [FILESETS...]} or @samp{jj restore --changes-in REV [FILESETS...]}

@node Reverting
@section Reverting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{V (Emacs) / _ (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-revert})
@kindex V (Emacs) / _ (Evil)
@findex majutsu-revert
Open the Revert transient to create reverse changes in a new revision.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Source revisions to revert (@samp{--revisions}).
@item @kbd{-o}
@kindex -o
Apply reverse changes on top of revisions (@samp{--onto}).
@item @kbd{-A / -B}
@kindex -A / -B
Insert reverse changes after or before selected revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj revert --revisions REV --onto DEST}

@node Sparse Working Copy
@section Sparse Working Copy

@table @asis
@item @kbd{>} (@code{majutsu-sparse})
@kindex >
@findex majutsu-sparse
Open the sparse working copy transient (set@comma{} add@comma{} remove@comma{} list@comma{} edit).
@end table

Sparse transient actions:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-sparse-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-sparse-list
List current sparse patterns in @samp{*Majutsu Sparse*}.
@item @kbd{s / S} (@code{majutsu-sparse-set / majutsu-sparse-set-clear})
@kindex s / S
@findex majutsu-sparse-set / majutsu-sparse-set-clear
Set patterns by appending@comma{} or replace the entire set after clearing it first.
@item @kbd{a / r} (@code{majutsu-sparse-add / majutsu-sparse-remove})
@kindex a / r
@findex majutsu-sparse-add / majutsu-sparse-remove
Add or remove patterns incrementally.
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-sparse-edit})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-sparse-edit
Edit patterns via @samp{jj sparse edit}.
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-sparse-reset})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-sparse-reset
Reset to all files (@samp{jj sparse reset}).
@end table

Notes:
@itemize
@item
Editing patterns opens a temporary @samp{.jjsparse} buffer.
@item
Lines starting with @code{JJ:} are comments and are ignored by Jujutsu.
@item
Pattern completion includes current directories/files from @samp{@@}.
@item
Default "all files" state is represented by single pattern @samp{.}.
@end itemize

@node Interactive Patching
@section Interactive Patching

Majutsu provides Magit-style partial hunk selection for Jujutsu operations. This allows you to select specific hunks@comma{} files@comma{} or even regions within hunks to include in Split@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Restore operations.

@menu
* How It Works::
* Diff Context Inheritance::
* Visual Feedback::
* Selection Semantics::
* Technical Implementation::
* Edge Cases::
* Workflow Example::
* Customization::
@end menu

@node How It Works
@subsection How It Works

Interactive selection is integrated into the Split (@code{S})@comma{} Squash (@code{s})@comma{} and Restore (@code{R}) transients. When you open one of these transients from a Diff buffer@comma{} a "Patch Selection" group appears with the following commands:

@multitable {aaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @code{H}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-hunk
@tab Toggle selection of hunk at point
@item @code{F}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-file
@tab Toggle selection of all hunks in file
@item @code{R}
@tab majutsu-interactive-toggle-region
@tab Toggle selection of active region
@item @code{C}
@tab majutsu-interactive-clear
@tab Clear all patch selections
@end multitable

@node Diff Context Inheritance
@subsection Diff Context Inheritance

When opening Split@comma{} Squash@comma{} or Restore from a Diff buffer@comma{} the transient automatically inherits the diff's context:
@itemize
@item
All three commands inherit @samp{--revisions} as their target revision (@samp{--revision} for Split/Squash)
@item
Restore additionally inherits @samp{--from} and @samp{--to} parameters@comma{} allowing selective restoration between arbitrary revisions
@end itemize

This means you can:
@enumerate
@item
View a diff with specific @samp{--from} / @samp{--to} revisions
@item
Open the Restore transient
@item
Select specific hunks to restore
@item
The restore will apply only to those hunks@comma{} using the diff's revision context
@end enumerate

@node Visual Feedback
@subsection Visual Feedback

Selected hunks are highlighted with @samp{majutsu-interactive-selected-hunk} face (green background by default). Selected regions within hunks use @samp{majutsu-interactive-selected-region} face (purple background).

@node Selection Semantics
@subsection Selection Semantics

The meaning of "selected" differs by operation:

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Split and Squash}Split and Squash


For Split and Squash@comma{} @strong{selected content is what gets moved}:
@itemize
@item
@strong{Split}: Selected hunks/regions go into the @strong{first} commit; unselected content stays in the second commit.
@item
@strong{Squash}: Selected hunks/regions get @strong{squashed into the parent}; unselected content remains in the current revision.
@end itemize

Example: You have a revision with changes to files A@comma{} B@comma{} and C@. You want to squash only the changes to file A into the parent:
@enumerate
@item
Open the diff for the revision (@code{D})
@item
Open Squash transient (@code{s})
@item
Press @code{F} on file A to select all its hunks
@item
Execute squash - file A's changes go to parent@comma{} B and C stay
@end enumerate

@item
@anchor{Restore}Restore


For Restore@comma{} selected content is what gets @strong{restored} (undone):
@itemize
@item
Selected hunks/regions are reverted to their state in the source revision
@item
Unselected content is left unchanged
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node Technical Implementation
@subsection Technical Implementation

Majutsu uses a custom merge tool to apply partial patches. When you execute an operation with selections:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Patch Generation}: Majutsu generates a unified diff patch containing only the selected hunks/regions.

@item
@strong{Tool Invocation}: Jujutsu's @samp{-i --tool} mechanism is used with a custom @samp{majutsu-applypatch} tool.

@item
@strong{Patch Application}:
@itemize
@item
For @strong{Split/Squash}: The tool resets @samp{$right} (current state) to @samp{$left} (parent state)@comma{} then applies the patch forward. This results in @samp{$right} containing only the selected changes.
@item
For @strong{Restore}: The tool applies the patch directly to @samp{$right}.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

This approach avoids the complexity of reverse patch application (@samp{git apply -R})@comma{} which has edge cases with new files@comma{} deleted files@comma{} and content starting with @samp{+} or @samp{-}.

@node Edge Cases
@subsection Edge Cases

Interactive patching supports all file operation types:

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{New Files}New Files


When splitting or squashing a new file:
@itemize
@item
If you select the entire file@comma{} it goes to the first commit / gets squashed
@item
If you select only part of the file@comma{} only those lines go; the rest stays
@item
Partial selection of new files works correctly because the patch is applied forward after resetting to parent state
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{Deleted Files}Deleted Files


@strong{Note: Interactive selection for deleted files is currently limited.}

When splitting or squashing a file deletion:
@itemize
@item
Selecting the @strong{entire} deletion works correctly - the file gets deleted in the first commit / parent
@item
@strong{Partial selection of deleted files is not yet supported} - you must select all lines or none
@end itemize

This limitation exists because git's patch format requires @samp{deleted file mode}
patches to remove the entire file contents. Partial deletion would require
converting to a regular modification patch@comma{} which has edge cases with context
matching.

@item
@anchor{Renamed/Copied Files}Renamed/Copied Files


Renamed and copied files are handled correctly:
@itemize
@item
The rename/copy metadata is preserved in the patch
@item
You can select specific hunks within renamed files just like regular modifications
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node Workflow Example
@subsection Workflow Example

@enumerate
@item
Open a diff with @code{D} or @code{d}
@item
Open Split (@code{S})@comma{} Squash (@code{s})@comma{} or Restore (@code{R}) transient
@item
Use @code{H} to select individual hunks@comma{} or @code{F} to select all hunks in a file
@item
For fine-grained control@comma{} mark a region and press @code{R} to select only those lines
@item
Press @code{C} to clear selections if needed
@item
Execute the operation - only selected changes will be affected
@end enumerate

@node Customization
@subsection Customization

@table @asis
@item Face: majutsu-interactive-selected-hunk
Face for selected hunks.
@item Face: majutsu-interactive-selected-region
Face for selected regions.
@end table

@node Metaediting
@section Metaediting

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? m} (@code{majutsu-metaedit})
@kindex ? m
@findex majutsu-metaedit
Open the Metaedit transient. Defaults to one revision from point (fallback @samp{@@}). If multiple revisions are selected@comma{} Majutsu asks you to narrow it down.
@item @kbd{-r / -m / -a / -t}
@kindex -r / -m / -a / -t
Set revision@comma{} message@comma{} author@comma{} and author timestamp.
@item @kbd{-c / -u / -U / -f}
@kindex -c / -u / -U / -f
Toggle update-change-id@comma{} update-author@comma{} update-author-timestamp@comma{} or force-rewrite.
@item @kbd{-I}
@kindex -I
Ignore immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj metaedit --revisions REV [OPTIONS...]}

@node Simplifying Parents
@section Simplifying Parents

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? P} (@code{majutsu-simplify-parents})
@kindex ? P
@findex majutsu-simplify-parents
Open the Simplify Parents transient.
@item @kbd{-s}
@kindex -s
Simplify specified revision(s) together with descendant trees (@samp{--source}).
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Simplify specified revision(s) only (@samp{--revisions}). If neither is set@comma{} Majutsu defaults to region or point revision(s)@comma{} fallback @samp{@@}.
@item @kbd{-I}
@kindex -I
Ignore immutable revisions.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj simplify-parents [--source REVSET] [--revisions REVSET]}

@node Bookmarks
@chapter Bookmarks

@menu
* Understanding Bookmarks::
* Bookmark Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Bookmarks
@section Understanding Bookmarks

In Jujutsu@comma{} bookmarks are similar to Git branches but are explicitly tracked. They point to a specific change ID@.

@node Bookmark Transient
@section Bookmark Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-bookmark})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-bookmark
Open the bookmark transient.

@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-bookmark-list
List all bookmarks.
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-create})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-bookmark-create
Create a new bookmark at point.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance
Advance bookmarks using jj's configured default selection and target.
@item @kbd{A} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance-to})
@kindex A
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance-to
Advance bookmarks using jj's default selection to an explicit target revset.
@item @kbd{p} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-advance-patterns})
@kindex p
@findex majutsu-bookmark-advance-patterns
Advance specific bookmark name(s)/pattern(s) using jj's configured default target.
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-set})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-bookmark-set
Set or move an existing bookmark to the current revision.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-move})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-bookmark-move
Move a bookmark.
@item @kbd{M} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-move-allow-backwards})
@kindex M
@findex majutsu-bookmark-move-allow-backwards
Move bookmark(s) with @samp{--allow-backwards}.
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-rename})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-bookmark-rename
Rename a bookmark.
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-delete})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-bookmark-delete
Delete a bookmark; this deletion propagates to remotes.
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-forget})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-bookmark-forget
Forget a bookmark locally without affecting remotes.
@item @kbd{t} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-track})
@kindex t
@findex majutsu-bookmark-track
Track a remote bookmark to create a local one.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-bookmark-untrack})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-bookmark-untrack
Untrack a remote bookmark.
@end table

@node Tags
@chapter Tags

@menu
* Understanding Tags::
* Tag Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Tags
@section Understanding Tags

In Jujutsu@comma{} tags are lightweight refs that point to revisions@comma{} similar to Git tags.
Majutsu wraps @samp{jj tag set/list/delete} and follows jj semantics where creating and
moving tags both use @samp{tag set} (moving requires @samp{--allow-move}).

@node Tag Transient
@section Tag Transient

Tag commands are intentionally dispatch-first.

@table @asis
@item @kbd{? t} (@code{majutsu-tag})
@kindex ? t
@findex majutsu-tag
Open the tag transient.
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-tag-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-tag-list
List tags in a dedicated buffer.
@item @kbd{s} (@code{majutsu-tag-set})
@kindex s
@findex majutsu-tag-set
Set tag(s). Uses completion and allows new names.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-tag-move})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-tag-move
Move existing tag(s) to another revision (internally @samp{--allow-move}).
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-tag-delete})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-tag-delete
Delete tag(s) by name or pattern.
@end table

Tag prompts use completion candidates from local tags. Existing tags are shown for
selection@comma{} while set/delete prompts still allow entering string patterns manually.

@node Git Integration
@chapter Git Integration

@menu
* Git Transient::
* Pushing::
* Fetching::
* Remotes::
* Clone and Init::
* Export and Import::
@end menu

@node Git Transient
@section Git Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{G (Emacs) / ? G (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-git-transient})
@kindex G (Emacs) / ? G (Evil)
@findex majutsu-git-transient
Open the Git transient. Jujutsu can interact directly with Git remotes.
@end table

@node Pushing
@section Pushing

@table @asis
@item @kbd{p} (@code{majutsu-git-push-transient})
@kindex p
@findex majutsu-git-push-transient
Open the Push transient. You can push bookmarks@comma{} revisions@comma{} or changes.
@item @kbd{-a}
@kindex -a
Push all bookmarks.
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Push tracked bookmarks only.
@item @kbd{-b}
@kindex -b
Push specific bookmark(s).
@item @kbd{-c}
@kindex -c
Push a specific change.
@item @kbd{-r}
@kindex -r
Push specific revision(s).
@item @kbd{-y}
@kindex -y
Show what would be pushed without pushing (@samp{--dry-run}).
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj git push}

@node Fetching
@section Fetching

@table @asis
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-git-fetch-transient})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-git-fetch-transient
Open the Fetch transient to pull changes from a remote.
@item @kbd{-R}
@kindex -R
Fetch from a specific remote.
@item @kbd{-B}
@kindex -B
Fetch a specific branch.
@item @kbd{-t}
@kindex -t
Fetch only tracked bookmarks.
@item @kbd{-A}
@kindex -A
Fetch from all remotes.
@end table
Runs: @samp{jj git fetch}

@node Remotes
@section Remotes

@table @asis
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-transient})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-git-remote-transient
Open the Remote Management transient.
@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-git-remote-list
List remotes.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-add})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-git-remote-add
Add a new Git remote.
@item @kbd{d} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-remove})
@kindex d
@findex majutsu-git-remote-remove
Remove a remote.
@item @kbd{n} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-rename})
@kindex n
@findex majutsu-git-remote-rename
Rename a remote.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-git-remote-set-url})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-git-remote-set-url
Set a remote URL@.
@end table

@node Clone and Init
@section Clone and Init

@table @asis
@item @kbd{c} (@code{majutsu-git-clone-transient})
@kindex c
@findex majutsu-git-clone-transient
Clone a Git repository into a jj repo.
@item @kbd{i} (@code{majutsu-git-init-transient})
@kindex i
@findex majutsu-git-init-transient
Initialize a new Git-backed jj repository.
@end table

@node Export and Import
@section Export and Import

Jujutsu automatically exports/imports to the underlying Git repo@comma{} but you can trigger it manually:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{e} (@code{majutsu-git-export})
@kindex e
@findex majutsu-git-export
Run @samp{jj git export}.
@item @kbd{m} (@code{majutsu-git-import})
@kindex m
@findex majutsu-git-import
Run @samp{jj git import}.
@item @kbd{o} (@code{majutsu-git-root})
@kindex o
@findex majutsu-git-root
Show the Git directory path (@samp{jj git root}).
@end table

@node Workspaces
@chapter Workspaces

@menu
* Understanding Workspaces::
* Workspace Transient::
@end menu

@node Understanding Workspaces
@section Understanding Workspaces

Jujutsu supports multiple workspaces sharing the same repository storage. This is similar to Git worktrees but more integrated.

@node Workspace Transient
@section Workspace Transient

@table @asis
@item @kbd{Z / % (Emacs) / * (Evil)} (@code{majutsu-workspace})
@kindex Z / % (Emacs) / * (Evil)
@findex majutsu-workspace
Open the workspace transient.

@item @kbd{l} (@code{majutsu-workspace-list})
@kindex l
@findex majutsu-workspace-list
List all workspaces.
@item @kbd{v} (@code{majutsu-workspace-visit})
@kindex v
@findex majutsu-workspace-visit
Visit a workspace by changing @samp{default-directory} and refreshing Majutsu buffers.
@item @kbd{a} (@code{majutsu-workspace-add})
@kindex a
@findex majutsu-workspace-add
Add a new workspace.
@item @kbd{f} (@code{majutsu-workspace-forget})
@kindex f
@findex majutsu-workspace-forget
Forget a workspace.
@item @kbd{u} (@code{majutsu-workspace-update-stale})
@kindex u
@findex majutsu-workspace-update-stale
Update a stale workspace.
@item @kbd{n} (@code{majutsu-workspace-rename})
@kindex n
@findex majutsu-workspace-rename
Rename a workspace.
@item @kbd{r} (@code{majutsu-workspace-root})
@kindex r
@findex majutsu-workspace-root
Show and copy the current workspace root.
@end table

Workspace sections are rendered from a structured @samp{jj workspace list -T}
template. By default they show each workspace name@comma{} working-copy ids@comma{}
description@comma{} and resolved root path when available. If jj cannot resolve a
workspace root@comma{} Majutsu treats it as unavailable instead of showing the raw
@samp{<Error: ...>} text in the section body.

@node Conflict Resolution
@chapter Conflict Resolution

@menu
* Detecting Conflicts::
* Entering Conflict Mode::
* majutsu-conflict-mode Commands::
@end menu

@node Detecting Conflicts
@section Detecting Conflicts

JJ marks conflicts in the log with a "conflict" label. Expanding the revision will show which files are conflicted.

@node Entering Conflict Mode
@section Entering Conflict Mode

You can enter conflict handling from multiple places:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{m in the Ediff transient} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve})
@kindex m in the Ediff transient
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve
Use the automatic resolve strategy.
@item @kbd{M in the Ediff transient} (@code{majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict})
@kindex M in the Ediff transient
@findex majutsu-ediff-resolve-with-conflict
Force the conflict workflow. This opens the working-copy file (or a revision blob buffer for non-working-copy revisions)@comma{} enables @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}@comma{} and jumps to the first conflict.
@end table

@deffn Command majutsu-conflict-ensure-mode
Enable conflict handling in a file with conflict markers.
@end deffn

@samp{majutsu-conflict} auto-detects marker styles:
@itemize
@item
JJ conflict markers (@samp{%%%%%%%} / @samp{+++++++} / @samp{-------} ) -> enable @samp{majutsu-conflict-mode}.
@item
JJ long conflict markers (e.g.@comma{} 15-char marker runs) are treated the same as normal markers.
@item
JJ conflicts with missing terminating newline markers are parsed with jj's newline-compensation semantics.
@item
Git-style markers (@samp{|||||||} / @samp{=====}) only -> enable @samp{smerge-mode}.
@end itemize

@node majutsu-conflict-mode Commands
@section majutsu-conflict-mode Commands

Emacs bindings use the prefix @code{C-c ^}:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{n / p} (@code{majutsu-conflict-next / majutsu-conflict-prev})
@kindex n / p
@findex majutsu-conflict-next / majutsu-conflict-prev
Jump to the next or previous conflict.
@item @kbd{b} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-base})
@kindex b
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-base
Keep the conflict base (snapshot / rebase destination section).
@item @kbd{1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N (the "after" side in JJ diff blocks).
@item @kbd{M-1..M-9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex M-1..M-9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N's "before" variant.
@item @kbd{R} (@code{majutsu-conflict-refine})
@kindex R
@findex majutsu-conflict-refine
Refine conflict regions with word-level highlighting.
@end table

Evil bindings are available in normal state:
@table @asis
@item @kbd{]] / gj} (@code{majutsu-conflict-next})
@kindex ]] / gj
@findex majutsu-conflict-next
Jump to the next conflict.
@item @kbd{[[ / gk} (@code{majutsu-conflict-prev})
@kindex [[ / gk
@findex majutsu-conflict-prev
Jump to the previous conflict.
@item @kbd{gb} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-base})
@kindex gb
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-base
Keep the base.
@item @kbd{gr 1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex gr 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N (the "after" side).
@item @kbd{gR 1..9} (@code{majutsu-conflict-keep-side})
@kindex gR 1..9
@findex majutsu-conflict-keep-side
Keep side N's "before" variant.
@item @kbd{ge} (@code{majutsu-conflict-refine})
@kindex ge
@findex majutsu-conflict-refine
Refine the conflict.
@end table

@node Customizing
@chapter Customizing

@menu
* Essential Settings::
* Confirmation Settings::
* Process Options::
* Display Options::
* Diff Options::
* Buffer Hooks::
* Description Options::
* Evil Integration::
@end menu

@node Essential Settings
@section Essential Settings

@defopt majutsu-jj-executable
Path to the @samp{jj} binary (default: @samp{"jj"}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-global-arguments
Global arguments passed to all jj commands (default: @samp{("--no-pager" "--color=always")}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-diffstat-columns
Column width used only for @samp{jj diff --stat} (default: @samp{80}). Set to @samp{nil} to inherit terminal width. Raise it if you want more full path visibility; keep it near 80 if you prefer compact stat bars.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-show-process-buffer-hint
Whether to show the "Type $ for details" hint on errors.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-debug
Enable debug logging for jj operations.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-show-command-output
Show jj command output in messages.
@end defopt

@node Confirmation Settings
@section Confirmation Settings

@defopt majutsu-confirm-critical-actions
If non-nil@comma{} prompt for confirmation before critical operations like abandon@comma{} undo@comma{} redo@comma{} rebase.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-no-confirm
A list of symbols for actions Majutsu should not confirm@comma{} or @samp{t} to never confirm. Valid symbols: @samp{undo}@comma{} @samp{redo}@comma{} @samp{abandon}@comma{} @samp{rebase}@comma{} @samp{workspace-forget}.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-slow-confirm
A list of actions that should use @samp{yes-or-no-p} instead of @samp{y-or-n-p}.
@end defopt

@node Process Options
@section Process Options

@defopt majutsu-process-popup-time
Popup the process buffer if a command takes longer than this many seconds. @samp{-1} means never@comma{} @samp{0} means immediately.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-log-max
Maximum number of sections to keep in a process log buffer (default: 32).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-apply-ansi-colors
When non-nil@comma{} convert ANSI escapes in jj output to text properties.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-process-timestamp-format
Format string for timestamps in process buffer sections.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jj-environment
Extra @samp{KEY=VALUE} entries prepended to subprocess environments for all jj invocations (local and TRAMP)@comma{} applied centrally by @samp{majutsu-process}.
@end defopt

@node Display Options
@section Display Options

@defopt majutsu-log-commit-columns
Ordered log field layout for log rendering. It also controls face policy per field using @code{:face}. For protocol details@comma{} module semantics@comma{} and schema examples@comma{} see @emph{Inspecting -> Log Buffer}.
@end defopt

@defvar majutsu-log-template-<field>
Template forms consumed by log fields. For newline and control-character rules@comma{} see @emph{Inspecting -> Log Buffer}.
@end defvar

@defopt majutsu-log-sections-hook
Hook run to insert sections in the log buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-display-buffer-function
Magit-style display strategy (default: @samp{majutsu-display-buffer-traditional}; traditional@comma{} same-window-except-diff@comma{} fullframe@comma{} topleft@comma{} fullcolumn).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-pre-display-buffer-hook
Hook run before displaying a buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-post-display-buffer-hook
Hook run after displaying a buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-bury-buffer-function
Function used by @code{q} to bury/quit Majutsu buffers (default: @samp{majutsu-mode-quit-window}; alternatives include @samp{quit-window} and @samp{majutsu-restore-window-configuration}).
@end defopt

@node Diff Options
@section Diff Options

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-hunk
Whether to show word-granularity differences inside hunks. @samp{nil} disables@comma{} @samp{t} refines current hunk@comma{} @samp{'all} refines all hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-ignore-whitespace
Whether to ignore whitespace while refining hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-refine-max-chars
Skip word refinement when a hunk spans more than this many characters.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-paint-whitespace
Whether to highlight whitespace issues inside diff hunks.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-diff-highlight-trailing
Whether to mark trailing whitespace in diff hunks.
@end defopt

@node Buffer Hooks
@section Buffer Hooks

@defopt majutsu-create-buffer-hook
Normal hook run when a new Majutsu buffer is created.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-setup-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after displaying the buffer.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-post-create-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after the initial refresh.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-refresh-buffer-hook
Normal hook run after refreshing.
@end defopt

@node Description Options
@section Description Options

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-major-mode
Major mode used for editing JJ description buffers (default: @code{text-mode}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-comment-prefix
Comment prefix used in JJ description buffers (default: @samp{"JJ:"}).
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-jjdescription-change-id-face
Face used for JJ Change ID values.
@end defopt

@defopt global-majutsu-jjdescription-mode
Global minor mode to enable JJ description buffer enhancements.
@end defopt

@node Evil Integration
@section Evil Integration

@defopt majutsu-evil-enable-integration
Set to @samp{nil} to disable automatic Evil bindings.
@end defopt

@defopt majutsu-evil-initial-state
The Evil state to start in (default: @samp{normal}).
@end defopt

@node Template DSL
@chapter Template DSL

@menu
* Overview::
* Why Use the DSL@?::
* Basic Syntax::
* Method Calls and Self::
* Operators::
* Conditionals and Composition::
* Elisp Embedding::
* Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations::
* Extending the DSL::
* Type System and Upstream Alignment::
* Supported Commands (for development reference)::
@end menu

@node Overview
@section Overview

Majutsu includes a domain-specific language (DSL) for building Jujutsu templates in Emacs Lisp. The main entry point is @samp{majutsu-tpl}@comma{} which compiles a vector-based DSL form into a jj template string.

@node Why Use the DSL@?
@section Why Use the DSL@?

The DSL provides several advantages over writing raw template strings:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Compile-time validation}: Syntax errors are caught during byte-compilation rather than at runtime when jj executes the template.
@item
@strong{Automatic escaping}: String literals are properly escaped (quotes@comma{} backslashes@comma{} control characters) without manual intervention.
@item
@strong{Elisp integration}: Embed Elisp expressions that evaluate at compile time@comma{} enabling dynamic template generation based on configuration or context.
@item
@strong{Composability}: Define reusable template functions with @samp{majutsu-template-defun} that expand inline@comma{} avoiding runtime overhead.
@item
@strong{Type awareness}: The DSL understands jj's type system@comma{} enabling self-type context for cleaner keyword syntax (@samp{[:description]} instead of @samp{[:method [:self] :description]}).
@item
@strong{Readability}: Vector-based syntax with keywords is more readable than deeply nested string concatenation.
@end itemize

Example comparison:
@lisp
;; Raw string (error-prone@comma{} hard to read)
"if(self.root()@comma{} \"(root)\"@comma{} self.commit_id().short())"

;; DSL (validated@comma{} composable@comma{} readable)
(majutsu-tpl [:if [:root] "(root)" [:commit_id :short]] 'Commit)
@end lisp

@node Basic Syntax
@section Basic Syntax

@menu
* Vectors and Concatenation::
* String Literals::
* Raw Injection::
* Booleans and Numbers::
@end menu

@node Vectors and Concatenation
@subsection Vectors and Concatenation

Vectors without a leading keyword are implicitly concatenated:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl ["A" "B"])           ; => "concat(\"A\"@comma{} \"B\")"
(majutsu-tpl [:concat "A" "B"])   ; => "concat(\"A\"@comma{} \"B\")"
@end lisp

Bare strings inside vectors are automatically treated as string literals (@samp{:str}).

@node String Literals
@subsection String Literals

Use @samp{:str} for explicit string literals with proper escaping:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:str "Hello \"World\""])  ; => "Hello \"World\""
@end lisp

@node Raw Injection
@subsection Raw Injection

Use @samp{:raw} to inject template code directly without escaping:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:raw "self.commit_id().short()"])  ; => "self.commit_id().short()"
@end lisp

Untyped raw snippets now default to semantic type @samp{Unknown} rather than
pretending to be @samp{Template}. If you want method-chain typing to keep flowing@comma{}
add an explicit annotation:
@lisp
[:raw "self" :Commit]
@end lisp

The callable position of @samp{:call} can be written as a quoted symbol@comma{}
keyword@comma{} or string name:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:call 'coalesce [:str ""] [:str "X"]])  ; => "coalesce(\"\"@comma{} \"X\")"
@end lisp

@node Booleans and Numbers
@subsection Booleans and Numbers

Elisp @samp{t} and @samp{nil} map to @samp{true} and @samp{false}. Numbers pass through directly:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:if t "yes" "no"])      ; => "if(true@comma{} \"yes\"@comma{} \"no\")"
(majutsu-tpl [:call 'pad_end 8 "x"])  ; => "pad_end(8@comma{} \"x\")"
@end lisp

@node Method Calls and Self
@section Method Calls and Self

@menu
* Explicit Method Chaining::
* Implicit Self Context::
* Explicit Receiver References::
* Binding Self in Helper Bodies::
@end menu

@node Explicit Method Chaining
@subsection Explicit Method Chaining

Use @samp{:method} to call methods on objects. Methods can be chained:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :commit_id])
; => "commit.commit_id()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :parents :len])
; => "commit.parents().len()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "commit" :Commit] :diff "src"])
; => "commit.diff(\"src\")"
@end lisp

@node Implicit Self Context
@subsection Implicit Self Context

At public compile entry points@comma{} when a self type is provided (or the default
self type is configured)@comma{} Majutsu installs a root @samp{self} binding and bare
keywords become method calls on that receiver:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:description] 'Commit)      ; => "self.description()"
(majutsu-tpl [:parents :len] 'Commit)     ; => "self.parents().len()"
@end lisp

@node Explicit Receiver References
@subsection Explicit Receiver References

Use @samp{[:self]} when you need the current implicit receiver as a value. When
nested lambdas or helper-local @samp{:bind-self} scopes introduce new receivers@comma{}
@samp{[:self N]} selects the outer binding @samp{N} levels up (@samp{[:self 0]} is the same
as @samp{[:self]}):
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:self] :description] 'Commit)
; => "self.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "self" :Commit]
                      :parents
                      :map
                      [:|p| [:method [:self 1] :description]]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| self.description())"
@end lisp

@node Binding Self in Helper Bodies
@subsection Binding Self in Helper Bodies

Ordinary helpers can temporarily rebind the implicit @samp{self} inside their body
with @samp{:bind-self}:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun show-canonical-log-id ((object Commit :optional t))
  (:returns Template :bind-self object)
  [:canonical-log-id])
@end lisp

When the bound parameter is nil@comma{} the helper inherits the outer @samp{self} binding.

@node Operators
@section Operators

Arithmetic and logical operators are supported:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:+ 1 2])              ; => "(1 + 2)"
(majutsu-tpl [:and [:> 3 1] [:<= 2 2]])  ; => "((3 > 1) && (2 <= 2))"
(majutsu-tpl [:not t])              ; => "(!true)"
(majutsu-tpl [:++ "L" "R"])         ; => "(\"L\" ++ \"R\")"
@end lisp

@node Conditionals and Composition
@section Conditionals and Composition

@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:if [:root] "(root)" [:commit_id]])
; => "if(self.root()@comma{} \"(root)\"@comma{} self.commit_id())"

(majutsu-tpl [:separate " " [:label "a" "A"] [:label "b" "B"]])
; => "separate(\" \"@comma{} label(\"a\"@comma{} \"A\")@comma{} label(\"b\"@comma{} \"B\"))"
@end lisp

@node Elisp Embedding
@section Elisp Embedding

Elisp expressions are evaluated when the template is compiled.
@lisp
(let* ((tmp 1)
       (s1 `[:concat @comma{}(if (> 2 tmp) [:str "T"] [:str "F"]) [:str "!"]])
       (s2 [:concat (if (> 2 tmp) [:str "T"] [:str "F"]) [:str "!"]])
       (tmp 3))
  (concat (majutsu-tpl s1) (majutsu-tpl s2)))
; => "concat(\"T\"@comma{} \"!\")concat(\"F\"@comma{} \"!\")"
@end lisp

@node Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations
@section Anonymous Functions and Higher-Order Operations

Anonymous functions are first-class template values:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl [:lambda [c] [:description]])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:|c| [:description]])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:parents :map [:|c| [:description]]])
; => "self.parents().map(|c| c.description())"

(majutsu-tpl [:call [:|c| [:description]] [:raw "item" :Commit]])
; => "item.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [[:lambda [c] [:description]] [:raw "item" :Commit]])
; => "item.description()"
@end lisp

The shorthand @samp{[:|c| BODY]} is equivalent to @samp{[:lambda [c] BODY]}.

Lambda parameters are lexical variables and can act as a deferred implicit @samp{self}
for bare keyword dispatch. A surface lambda such as @samp{[:lambda [c] [:description]]}
is therefore kept generic first and can later be specialized from a typed call
argument or a higher-order container element. In those cases @samp{[:description]}
becomes equivalent to @samp{[:method 'c :description]}. If you prefer@comma{} you can also
write that explicit @samp{[:method 'c ...]} form directly@comma{} but most examples use bare
keywords because it better matches the implicit-self model. Explicit lexical
references also keep working across nested lambdas@comma{} so inner bodies may still
refer to outer parameters by name when that is clearer than rebinding receiver
context. This deferred behavior is limited to lambda parameters; Majutsu no
longer uses unknown non-lambda receivers as a general bare-keyword fallback. If
you need an outer receiver explicitly inside a nested lambda@comma{} use @samp{[:self N]}.

For example@comma{} the inner body below uses all three forms at once: @samp{[:description]}
for the inner receiver@comma{} @samp{[:self 1]} for the outer receiver@comma{} and explicit
@samp{[:method 'o ...]} for the outer lexical parameter:
@lisp
(majutsu-tpl
 [[:|o|
   [[:|i|
     [:if [:method 'o :root]
         [:description]
       [:method [:self 1] :description]]]
    [:raw "inner" :Commit]]]
  [:raw "outer" :Commit]])
; => "if(outer.root()@comma{} inner.description()@comma{} outer.description())"
@end lisp

List-oriented methods can be written in several equivalent styles:
@lisp
;; Historical explicit-binder sugar (lowers to a native lambda internally)
(majutsu-tpl [:map [:raw "self.bookmarks()"] b [:raw "b.name()"]])
; => "self.bookmarks().map(|b| b.name())"

;; Direct jj-style method call with an anonymous lambda
(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:lambda [c] [:description]]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

;; Dash-style explicit lambda
(majutsu-tpl [:-map [:lambda [c] [:description]] [:raw "refs"]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

;; Dash-style anaphoric shorthand
(majutsu-tpl [:--map [:method 'it :description] [:raw "refs"]])
; => "refs.map(|it| it.description())"

(majutsu-tpl [:method
              [:map [:raw "self.parents()"] p [:raw "p.commit_id()"]]
              :join [:str "@comma{} "]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| p.commit_id()).join(\"@comma{} \")"

(majutsu-tpl [:map-join [:str "@comma{} "] [:raw "self.parents()"] p [:raw "p.commit_id()"]])
; => "self.parents().map(|p| p.commit_id()).join(\"@comma{} \")"
@end lisp

Prefer direct lambdas and @samp{map + join} composition in new code. The historical
binder forms such as @samp{[:map collection var body]} and @samp{:map-join} remain as
compatibility sugar@comma{} but they now lower through the same core
@samp{:method} + @samp{:lambda} path as direct method calls. Similarly@comma{} @samp{:-map} remains a
value-level explicit-lambda helper while the @samp{:--map} family is syntax sugar
layered on top of the same lambda support.

This is a deliberate Majutsu DSL adaptation. Upstream jj centers the
higher-order story around expressions such as @samp{collection.map(|x| body)};
Majutsu keeps that core model and layers additional sugar on top of it.
Reusable lambda bodies can therefore also be defined as ordinary helpers that
return native lambda values:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun description-fn ()
  (:returns Lambda)
  [:lambda [c] [:description]])

(majutsu-tpl [:description-fn])
; => "|c| c.description()"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:description-fn]])
; => "refs.map(|c| c.description())"

(majutsu-template-defun description-with-suffix ((suffix Template))
  (:returns Lambda)
  `[:lambda [c] [:concat [:description] @comma{}suffix]])

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "refs"] :map [:description-with-suffix [:str "!"]]])
; => "refs.map(|c| concat(c.description()@comma{} \"!\"))"
@end lisp

@node Extending the DSL
@section Extending the DSL

Use @samp{majutsu-template-defun} to define reusable template functions:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun my-helper ((label Template) (value Template :optional t))
  (:returns Template)
  `[:concat @comma{}label [:str ": "] @comma{}(or value [:str ""])])

(majutsu-tpl [:my-helper [:str "ID"] [:str "VAL"]])
; => "concat(\"ID\"@comma{} \": \"@comma{} \"VAL\")"
@end lisp

When a helper omits its body@comma{} @samp{majutsu-template-defun} defaults to a simple
wrapper around the same jj callable name:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defun my-fill ((width Integer) (content Template))
  (:returns Template))

(majutsu-tpl [:my-fill 8 "x"])
; => "my-fill(8@comma{} \"x\")"
@end lisp

Syntax-level sugar should be defined separately with
@samp{majutsu-template-defspecial}@comma{} which receives raw forms and lowers them to more
primitive template syntax:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defspecial :wrap-angle (body)
  `[:concat [:str "<"] @comma{}body [:str ">"]])

(majutsu-tpl [:wrap-angle [:str "x"]])
; => "concat(\"<\"@comma{} \"x\"@comma{} \">\")"
@end lisp

Owner-bound methods can also be defined locally in the DSL@. A body-less
@samp{majutsu-template-defmethod} / @samp{majutsu-template-defkeyword} declaration just
registers metadata for a native/rendered method@comma{} but providing a body turns it
into a local owner-bound lowering:
@lisp
(majutsu-template-defkeyword canonical-log-id Commit
  (:returns Template)
  [:if [:or [:hidden]
             [:divergent]]
       [:commit_id :shortest 8]
     [:change_id :shortest 8]])

(majutsu-tpl [:canonical-log-id] 'Commit)
; => "if((self.hidden() || self.divergent())@comma{} self.commit_id().shortest(8)@comma{} self.change_id().shortest(8))"

(majutsu-tpl [:method [:raw "p" :Commit] :canonical-log-id])
; => "if((p.hidden() || p.divergent())@comma{} p.commit_id().shortest(8)@comma{} p.change_id().shortest(8))"
@end lisp

@node Type System and Upstream Alignment
@section Type System and Upstream Alignment

The DSL supports Jujutsu's type system: @samp{Any}@comma{} @samp{String}@comma{} @samp{Boolean}@comma{} @samp{Integer}@comma{}
@samp{Template}@comma{} @samp{Commit}@comma{} @samp{Signature}@comma{} @samp{Timestamp}@comma{} @samp{List}@comma{} @samp{Option}@comma{} and more.
Type annotations can be added to @samp{:raw} nodes:
@lisp
[:raw "self" :Commit]  ; Declares the raw value has type Commit
@end lisp

Without an annotation@comma{} @samp{:raw} remains @samp{Unknown}. This keeps the DSL honest:
raw snippets still compile@comma{} but richer type propagation only kicks in once the
expression is explicitly typed or inferred through later semantic steps.

Majutsu distinguishes between broad @samp{Any} expression placeholders and the
narrower printable @samp{Template} capability. In practice@comma{} @samp{Any} means “some
expression”@comma{} while @samp{Template} means content that can actually be rendered or
concatenated.

Majutsu also propagates core result types through the normalized AST@. For
example@comma{} @samp{parents()} is tracked as a list of commits@comma{} @samp{lines()} as a list of
strings@comma{} @samp{trailers()} as @samp{(:list Trailer)}@comma{} mapped lists use ordinary
container refs such as @samp{(:list String)}@comma{} and list methods such as @samp{first()}
preserve the element type.

A few upstream categories are still intentionally simplified in Majutsu's
checker. For parameters that upstream models as @samp{StringLiteral}@comma{} Majutsu
currently recognizes obvious literal strings@comma{} but it does not try to prove that
more complex expressions become literals after helper expansion or constant
folding. Upstream also has distinct @samp{AnyList}-style result categories; Majutsu
currently models those as ordinary container refs instead.

@node Supported Commands (for development reference)
@section Supported Commands (for development reference)

Templates can be used with these jj commands:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Command
@tab Self Type
@item log
@tab Commit
@item show
@tab Commit
@item evolog
@tab CommitEvolutionEntry
@item diff
@tab TreeDiffEntry
@item bookmark list
@tab CommitRef
@item tag list
@tab CommitRef
@item file annotate
@tab AnnotationLine
@item file list
@tab TreeEntry
@item file show
@tab TreeEntry
@item op log
@tab Operation
@item op show
@tab Operation
@item workspace list
@tab WorkspaceRef
@item config list
@tab ConfigValue
@end multitable

@node Keystroke Index
@appendix Keystroke Index

@printindex ky

@node Function and Command Index
@appendix Function and Command Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@appendix Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
